Austin mental health resources that are free or low cost based on income

First, if you are suicidal and need immediate help anywhere in the USA, call 988.
An Austin friend of mine has struggled with mental health and learned a lot about free and low cost treatment options, and posted this information on Facebook. With her permission, I'm reposting it here in the hopes that it can be found more easily with Google and other search engines, read more easily without having to log in to Facebook, and can help more people:
There are many Austin mental health treatment options available. Depression and other mental health problems often make it harder to search for help and get help. I am not a medical professional or drug counselor, but I have struggled with mental illness and sobriety, and these are the resources I found most helpful. Many of these are for Travis County and city of Austin residents, and others are more general.
Warm lines
: Phone lines for when you are having a mental health crisis but are not actively suicidal, or for when you just really need someone to talk to right now.
These two are Texas specific but have limited hours:
An Ear to Listen and a Passion to Care (844) 755-4673 M-F 12-10pm
MHA Texas Warm Line (817) 546-7826 M-F 8-5
There is no Texas specific 24/7 warm line. These three are from other states, but they do take calls from Texas and are 24/7.
WA (877) 500-9276
IL (630) 966-9393
NM (505) 277-3013
Therapy
: Capitol Area Counseling. Sliding scale. For example, I am paying $20 per session. These are newer therapists still working on their hours for certification. They are less experienced but are overseen by graduate advisors. I have one I really like but I had to go through a few to get there.
Medications
: Integral Care. Free for low income and also takes most insurance. I think the income cap is surprisingly high. If you aren’t in active crisis, the appointment system is difficult to work with. I have found getting meds refilled there to be difficult because of this. You can only make appointments a week in advance. So if you have problems with memory or executive function, you might forget and not get to your appointment and not get your refills. Their lobby is sensory overload. I now bring ear plugs, sunglasses and fidget toys and it is more bearable.
Drugs and alcohol help
:
Communities for Recovery.
I found rehab and help was often extremely expensive, often only available to people who are already homeless, often didn’t take many types of insurance or took no insurance, and was often religious or not using practices that are based on our current scientific knowledge. Many of us consider AA to be religious, although others say it is not. Surprisingly, Communities for Recovery is not on the first page of Google results.
Communities for Recovery is free. They can help with group meetings but I think the best service they offer is the Peer Support Specialist program, which is similar to the AA sponsor program, and with good training and oversight. It is useful to have someone who can walk you through the early stages of recovery and help if you are suddenly struggling. I got sober by myself, and I was doing well until my divorce. Fortunately, that’s when I found Communities for Recovery. They also have science based SMART meetings, and my preferred meetings, Dharma Recovery, which are loosely based in Buddhist philosophy and focus heavily on getting control of your own mind through mindfulness techniques. They also have free yoga classes and many other resources. The only significant downside is the location, at the mental hospital on Lamar.
Integral Care. Not everyone knows, but there are medications that can really help you get sober. Some reduce cravings. Others reduce withdrawal symptoms. Others can prevent the normal effects of addictive drugs, so even if you relapse, the drugs will have no effect. Groups such as AA cannot provide medications, although good rehab centers can.
Career counseling
:
ACC. Free. They will help anyone who has ever taken a class there, new students, and prospective students, which means almost anyone. If you haven’t been to ACC previously, it might be more paperwork. They provide career coaching and help with resumes, interview prep, elevator pitches, and cover letters.
Integral Care. They have career coaches who will hand hold you through the process of finding a job. If you are burnt out and really discouraged, they are the best option. They are also the most nimble and responsive.
TWC. Not the best job counseling services, but they do provide help with funding for education for currently unemployed people with disabilities through their "Vocational Rehabilitation Program" (somewhat mis-named because it's really just disability services). Most education funding is geared toward bachelor’s degrees. This can be a great resource if you are going for a certificate program, continuing education, or graduate program. Be aware that it is slow, and the VR specialists can be burnt out and not very friendly.
Professional diagnosis
: TWC. This is through their Vocational Rehabilitation Program for people who are currently unemployed. Getting a full psychological evaluation, the gold standard for diagnosis, can be very expensive if you are going through self pay, often around from $800 to $2000, but if you are unemployed TWC will do it for free. You may have to jump through a lot of hoops and get past unfriendly VR specialists before you get to the actual professionals. However, the actual PhD licensed psychologists are very professional and caring.
Insurance or the closest thing you can get to it
:
Obamacare, the national website to purchase insurance. Many of the options are income based and you might find something you can afford. Unfortunately, enrollment times are limited.
healthcare.gov
MAPS. This isn’t really insurance but it can get you care at rates similar to copays on an insurance plan. It is only available to people in Travis County. I would say their system is fairly difficult to navigate and I think only two main providers accept MAPS, one whose name I don't know, and Lone Star Community of Care.
www.centralhealth.net/map/
Medicaid. Might be worth checking out to see if you are eligible.
medicaid.gov
Other resources
for mental health that are free and are not location specific:
Insight timer. An app for meditation content you can sort by length, male or female voices and what you need out of meditation. It does have in-app purchases but it is completely functional without them.
Yoga with Adrienne. Her Youtube channel is great for learning breathing techniques, getting in tune with your body (which can help you prevent a panic attack if you realize you are getting upset before you hit full panic), building distress tolerance (a CBT and DBT technique), lessening physical pain, and generally getting in shape.
How to ADHD. Useful for people with ADHD, and also for people who do not have ADHD but have executive functioning problems, which can come from burn out, grief, PTSD, autism, and many other disorders. She offers practical advice that you can act on. This might feel like more tangible solutions than other options.
Read more